Updated the concepts and merged Cantons key concepts (#13010)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/concepts/glossary.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2022 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. TODO: Add Links to the new sentences
.. TODO: Ask Carrie about which words to link in the glossary
.. TODO: Ensure that the capitalisation is correct on names, such as the Canton Protocol

Glossary of concepts
####################

Key Concepts
************

Daml

> ****

Author: Yup, this was intended.  I believe that Daml is a key concept, just as the other terms under the heading key concepts.

.. TODO: Ensure that the capitalisation is correct on names, such as the Canton Protocol

Glossary of concepts
####################

Key Concepts
************

Daml
====

Daml is a platform for building and running sophisticated, multi-party applications. At its core, it contains a smart contract `language <#daml-language>`__ and `tooling <#developer-tools>`__ 
that defines the schema, semantics, and execution of transactions between parties. Daml includes `Canton <#canton-ledger>`__, a privacy-enabled distributed ledger that is enhanced when deployed 
with complementary blockchains.

Daml Language
=============

The Daml language is a purpose-built language for rapid development of composable multi-party applications. It is a modern, ergonomically designed functional language that carefully avoids many 
of the pitfalls that hinder multi-party application development in other languages.

Canton Ledger
=============

A Canton ledger is a privacy-enabled distributed ledger that is enhanced when deployed with complementary blockchains. The Canton ledger is where the Daml `contracts <#contract>`__ live.

The Canton ledger is often just referred to as 'the ledger' for simplicity.

> .. Canton protocol.  Not Canton transaction protocol (following the example made by marketing - they don't use the word 'transaction')

Author: Removing

Canton Protocol
===============

The Canton protocol is the technology which synchronizes `participant nodes <#participant-node>`__ across any Daml-enabled blockchain or database.  The Canton protocol not only makes Daml 
applications portable between different underlying `synchronization technologies <#synchronization-technology>`__, but also allows applications to transact with each other across them.

> .. Synchronization technology.  Not 'Environment', 'Infrastructure layer', 'Messaging layer', 'Topology layer', 'Underlying <enter-any-previous-term>'

Author: I want to leave this in for the time being.  I want to make sure that those reviewing this, yourself, @bame-da @meiersi-da & @carrielaben-da are happy with the terminology.

Synchronization Technology
=====================

The syncronisation technology is the database or blockchain that Daml uses for synchronization, messaging and toplogy. Daml runs on a range of synchronization technologies, from centralized 
databases to fully distributed deployments, and users can employ the technology that best suits their technical and operational needs.

Daml Drivers
============

Daml drivers enable a `Canton ledger <#canton-ledger>`__ to be implemented on top of different `synchronization technologies <#synchronization-technology>`__; a database or distributed ledger technology. 

> Daml provides drivers for PostgreSQL, Oracle Database, VMware Blockchain, Hyperledger Fabric, Hyperledger Besu, and other blockchains and databases.

Author: True, I've removed the comment completely, having a statement about which ones are GA and beta in here will also likely get out of date and we'll forget to update.  I want to put a link in to say where to check for updated drivers but I don't know which docs, or marketing link is available at the moment so I'll leave it out for now.

A **party** represents a person or legal entity. Parties can `create contracts <#create>`__ and `exercise choices <#exercise>`__.

`Signatories <#signatory>`_, `observers <#observer>`__, `controllers <#controller>`__, and `maintainers <#maintainer>`__ all must be parties, represented by the ``Party`` data type in Daml and determine who may see
  contract data.

Parties are hosted on participant nodes and a participant node can host more than one party. A party can be hosted on several participant nodes simultaneously.

.. Something about how they work in the `execution engine`.

Signatory
---------

> A **signatory** is a `party <#party>`__ on a `contract <#contract>`__. The signatories MUST consent to the `creation <#create>`__ of the contract by `authorizing <#authorization-signing>`__ it: if they don't, contract creation will fail. Once the contract is created, signatories can see the contracts and all exercises in that contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **signatory** is a `party <#party>`__ on a `contract <#contract>`__. The signatories MUST consent to the `creation <#create>`__ of the contract by `authorizing <#authorization-signing>`__ it: if they don't, contract creation will fail. Once the contract is created, signatories can see the contracts and all exercises of that contract.
```

A **party** represents a person or legal entity. Parties can `create contracts <#create>`__ and `exercise choices <#exercise>`__.

`Signatories <#signatory>`_, `observers <#observer>`__, `controllers <#controller>`__, and `maintainers <#maintainer>`__ all must be parties, represented by the ``Party`` data type in Daml and determine who may see
  contract data.

> Parties are hosted on participant nodes and a participant node can host more than one party.

Author: I've added that sentence from the current Canton terminology.

.. Something about how they work in the `execution engine`.

Signatory
---------

> A **signatory** is a `party <#party>`__ on a `contract <#contract>`__. The signatories MUST consent to the `creation <#create>`__ of the contract by `authorizing <#authorization-signing>`__ it: if they don't, contract creation will fail. Once the contract is created, signatories can see the contracts.

Author: I've added the part about being able to see all exercises

DAR file, DALF file
===================

> A Daml Archive file, known as a ``.dar`` file is the result of compiling Daml code using the `Assistant <#assistant>`__ and contains compiled Daml code that can be interpreted using a Daml interpreter.

Author: Edited it to make it easier to understand

You upload ``.dar`` files to a `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__ in order to be able to create contracts from the templates in that file.

> A ``.dar`` contains multiple 'Daml ledger fragment packages' known as ``.dalf`` files. A ``.dalf`` file is the output of a compiled Daml package or library. Its underlying format is `Daml-LF <#daml-lf>`__.

Author: I disagree, it's just to understand why it's called a 'dalf'.

> A ``.dar`` contains multiple 'Daml ledger fragment packages' known as ``.dalf`` files. A ``.dalf`` file is the output of a compiled Daml package or library. Its underlying format is `Daml-LF <#daml-lf>`__.

Author: OK, I removed that section.

Application, ledger client, integration
=======================================

**Application**, **ledger client** and **integration** are all terms for an application that sits on top of the `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__. These usually `read from the ledger <#reading-from-the-ledger>`_, `send commands <#submitting-commands-writing-to-the-ledger>`__ to the ledger, or both.

There's a lot of information available about application development, starting with the :doc:`/app-dev/app-arch` page.

Ledger API
==========

> The **Ledger API** is an API that's exposed by any `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__ on a participant node. Users access and manipulate the ledger state from the perspective of a party through the leger API.

Author: If you don't like it please suggest an alternative.  I still think it's correct. Aren't admin operations still done using a party? I don't think that multi-party submissions negate that users still interact with the ledger from the perspective of a party.

> The **Ledger API** is an API that's exposed by any `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__ on a participant node. Users access and manipulate the ledger state from the perspective of a party through the leger API.

Reviewer: > Aren't admin operations still done using a party? 

No there is no party involved there. With user management there is a user involved but we don’t mandate user management so I don’t think that’s the right statement here. I’d just drop this sentence.

> The **Ledger API** is an API that's exposed by any `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__ on a participant node. Users access and manipulate the ledger state from the perspective of a party through the leger API.

Author: I removed 'from the perspective of a party'

> Alternative names: **Canton Ledger API** and **gRPC Ledger API** if disambiguation from other technologies is needed.

Author: I've removed the Canton ledger API as an alternative name.

See :doc:`/app-dev/ledger-api` page.
It includes the following :doc:`services </app-dev/services>`.

Command submission service
--------------------------

> Use the **command submission service** to `submit commands <#submitting-commands-writing-to-the-ledger>`__ - either create commands or exercise commands - to the `ledger <#canton-ledger>`__. See :ref:`command-submission-service`.

Reviewer: You’re linking everything to Canton now. Do we just ignore that vmbc exists?

Author: How do you suggest that we clarify the two?

Reviewer: I haven’t kept up with our messaging for 2.0 so if you tell me this is fine, I’m happy.

So far, we had the generic concept of a ledger which was anything that exposes a gRPC ledger API and conforms to the ledger API and Canton was one implementation of that.

Author: This is a good catch.  I've clarified the two in the description and changed the appropriate links to point to the Daml ledger.

.. _daml-lf:

Atomic Transaction
==================

> The ability to effect a set of changes atomically such that either all changes happen or nothing happens in case of a conflict or error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A set of changes that is committed such that either all of them happen simultaneously, or none at all in case of a conflict or error.
```
Unnecessary circular reference. Unnecessary repetition. However, I don't think that "atomic transaction" should be a glossary definition that we explain. There are far better explanation elsewhere (e.g. Wikipedia).

Author: I added this in from the Canton docs. I can however, see the point.  I'll remove.

- sending and receiving values via the Ledger API (using a protocol such as gRPC)
- generating code in other languages for interacting with Daml models (often called “codegen”)

Composability
=============

Composability is the ability of a participant to extend an existing system with new Daml applications or new topologies unilaterally without requiring cooperation from anyone except the 
directly involved participants who wish to be part of the new application functionality.

Canton Concepts
***************

.. Language for the participant node was taken, and edited, from the Canton key terms page

> Participant Node

Reviewer 2: Are you sure you want all of these concepts under "Canton"? Some of them are generic concepts not directly tied to Canton.

Author: agree, I moved the participant node section out of the Canton section and into the 'building applications' section

- sending and receiving values via the Ledger API (using a protocol such as gRPC)
- generating code in other languages for interacting with Daml models (often called “codegen”)

Composability
=============

Composability is the ability of a participant to extend an existing system with new Daml applications or new topologies unilaterally without requiring cooperation from anyone except the 
directly involved participants who wish to be part of the new application functionality.

> Trust domain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _trust-domain:

Trust domain
```

- sending and receiving values via the Ledger API (using a protocol such as gRPC)
- generating code in other languages for interacting with Daml models (often called “codegen”)

Composability
=============

Composability is the ability of a participant to extend an existing system with new Daml applications or new topologies unilaterally without requiring cooperation from anyone except the 
directly involved participants who wish to be part of the new application functionality.

Canton Concepts
***************

> .. Language for the participant node was taken, and edited, from the Canton key terms page

Reviewer: drop these comments please

Author: I will, but why so offended?  You've seen them so you know the context to the sentences, but no one else will.

Reviewer: Sorry this came across the wrong way. I’m not all offended. The reason why I want to drop them is that I generally want our repo to document the current state and not so much the history of how we got there because that quickly gets out of date and shouldn’t really be relevant.

Domain Identity Manager
=======================

The Domain Identity Manager is a service provided by the `domain <#domain>`__, used by the `Canton protocol <#canton-protocol>`__. Participants join a new domain by registering with the domain identity manager. The domain 
identity manager establishes a consistent identity state among all participants. The domain identity manager only forwards identity updates. It can not invent them.

Consensus
=========

The Canton protocol does not use PBFT or any similar consensus algorithm. There is no proof of work or proof of stake involved. Instead, Canton uses a variant of a stakeholder based 
two-phase commit protocol. As such, only stakeholders of a transaction are involved in it and need to process it, providing efficiency, privacy and horizontal scalability. Canton based 
ledgers are resilient to malicious participants as long as there is at least a single honest participant. A domain integration itself might be using the consensus mechanism of the underlying 
platform, but participant nodes will not be involved in that process.

.. General concepts
.. ****************

.. _trust-domain:

> .. Trust domain

Reviewer: if we don’t need that, let’s delete it completely instead of commenting it out.

Author: Removed
